I think getting hit by successive shocks
is just here to stay and I think you can
identify some already. So if economic
statecraft is how major world powers are
going to operate using economic tools
for foreign policy goals, those just
represent negative supply shocks for
someone.
Um and so, you know, I think we will
continue to have negative supply shocks,
whether it's tariffs or export controls
or you know, investment controls, all
these things. Um and then, you know,
climate change, uh whether it's, you
know, physical risk or transition risk,
if it crystallizes, that represents a
negative supply shock as well. So, we're
no longer at a point where we can kind
of say, well, one day we might have some
of these things happen. I think we're
already there. And so, this old adage
that you should just look through
negative supply shocks cuz you can't
address them directly, I don't think it
works when you keep having them wave
after wave. Um and I also think uh you
there's just a ton of uncertainty now. A
lot of economists feel like they had a
framework for understanding how the
global economy worked and it it doesn't
work anymore, but no one's quite
identified the new one. And so,
in an age when you have this much
uncertainty, um you need to stop
thinking about your very specific
forecast where you duke it out whether
inflation's 0.2 percentage points higher
or lower in year three of your forecast,
it's kind of neither here nor there.
It's much more about kind of scenario
analysis and risk management when you're
making decisions about interest rates.
So, figuring out, you know, if if we
thought we were in this state of the
world and it turns out we're in a
different one, how bad would could we
mess that up and how do we minimize some
of those costs?
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, you know one nice thing about
getting old?
>> Go on.
>> I've been thinking about this a lot,
actually. The nice thing about getting
old is that a lot of people that you
have known for a very long time and that
you've sort of
grown up with, let's say, over the
years, start to get into really
interesting positions and sometimes
senior positions or sometimes positions
of of power.
>> I love this take, right? Yeah, there are
certain people that you don't get to
know or you're you know, when you're in
your 20s or whatever, your peers your
peers are just great, but they probably
aren't, for example, external members of
the Bank of England Monetary Policy
Committee and so forth or other such
roles, but as you get senior, you're
like, "Oh, wow, I know that person. I
recognize that name." As you guys like
to say who went to university in London,
"I went to uni with that person." My
impression is that everyone in London,
quote, went to uni with literally
everyone else because I've heard you and
Sid say that specific phrase so many
times over the last decade.
>> No, not that often, surely. Um, but
you're absolutely right. Uh, you've sort
of given the guest away. We're going to
be speaking with someone that we've
known for a long time and I think a lot
of people have known her for a long time
from her very public role on Finance
Twitter
>> That's right.
>> as they say and also in various columns
in different media organizations.
>> roles and serious roles, yeah.
>> To me, she will always be a member of
Finance Twitter, but yes, various
professional roles and now she is, in
fact, an external member of the Monetary
Policy Committee at the Bank of England.
>> And it's a really interesting time, of
course, to be talking about monetary
policy. I mean, I would say it's an
interesting time to always an
interesting time to be talking about
monetary policy, but I would say it's a
particularly interesting time because I
could list several reasons for that. So,
obviously, we are still in the wake of
the incredible inflation wave that we
had post-COVID and at least in much of
the world, inflation has not returned to
target. In fact, in some countries, uh
rate hike cycle is begun. So, there's
still the live issue. There is the
shifting political uh situation in many
countries in which the very premise of
like, well, how much independence should
the central bank have to operate is
being rediscussed and so on.
>> And it is, in fact, local elections in
the UK right now.
>> We're speaking uh during the week of uh
local elections. And then, of course,
you know, okay, COVID shock, maybe
transitory, a one-off thing, but uh we
have lots of uh Governor Christopher
Waller in the US, he had a good speech
recently called one transitory shock
after another. Of course, in this case,
alluding to the war in Iran and so, what
does the price in oil and so forth mean
for inflation? There's so many
interesting questions right now for
anyone in the seat of a monetary policy
maker.
>> So much. And also, the interaction
between monetary policy and the bond
market as well, right? So, we're
recording this, well, I have to say this
for every episode now, on May 6th.
Yesterday, we saw the 30-year UK gilt
yield hit its highest since 1998. And
that was after the BOE decision from
last week to actually hold interest
rates. So, there's a tension there.
Anyway, we have so much to talk about.
>> Truly the perfect guest. We are, of
course, going to be speaking with Megan
Green. Thank you so much for coming on
the show, Megan.
>> Thank you for having me. It's great to
see you guys again.
>> It's very, very fun. Um very nostalgic.
What's it like to go from I guess
thinking and writing and tweeting about
economics to actually practicing
>> Setting.
>> economics. Yeah, setting economic
policy.
>> Yeah, so first of all, I love that you
guys think of me as finance Twitter.
>> For
>> It certainly was not paying any of my
bills
over the years. Um now, sadly, my
Twitter account is relegated mostly to
baseball commentary. Um
>> Understood.
>> Go Red Sox. But, um but, you know, it's
very different to go from kind of
analyzing and forecasting what central
bankers will do to being a central
banker and being, you know, making the
sausage myself. So, it's it's a very
different position um with a whole lot
more responsibility.
>> We like talking to Americans who have
served on the MPC. Yeah, well, we've
talked, you know, Adam Posen has been on
the show
a bunch of times. So, you know, it's
plausible that you and I could be MPC
members. What is your role? What does it
mean to be an external member of the MPC
at the BOE?
>> Yeah, so that's a great question and the
Bank of England is pretty unique for its
set up this way. So, the Monetary Policy
Committee, which meets every 6 weeks and
votes on interest rates uh is comprised
of nine people.
Five are so-called internals and four
are so-called externals.
Um and the internal members are the
governor, the deputy governors, and the
chief economist. Some of them grew up at
the Bank of England, some of them
didn't, some of them came in, but
they're all part of the executive. And
then the four external members of the
MPC, of which I'm one, um quite
intentionally came from outside the
bank. Um and what that means exactly is,
you know, differs in every case. So, it
could be from outside the industry
entirely, it could be from outside the
country as you can tell from my accent.
Um and also from my background, I'm a
little bit of both, although actually
I'm also British, so I'm not sure how
they're Yeah, by passport, I'm not sure
how they're classifying me. Um but
there's always been an American actually
on the MPC. It's not a rule.
>> So, you and Adam aren't the first.
>> No, so there have been Yeah, there have
been others. Um but the idea is just to
have to quite intentionally bring in
different perspectives. The external
members sit in a different part of the
bank from the internal members so that
we don't all collude and get stuck in
group think. Um so, the idea is to have
different perspectives. You know, I I
come from the private sector, many
members of the MPC come from academia,
so I bring kind of the business
environment um corporate side of things
uh and also from outside the country.
So, I spend a lot of time looking at
international spillovers. You can see in
my speeches how the UK's affected by
things happening in the US and the
Eurozone, for example. Um so, the idea
is to just fight group think. Um and you
can see that often in our votes, right?
We're also unique for reporting who
voted for what um every time. And so,
you can see what the vote split is.
>> out which dot is to and in the US they
report, but I guess in in the Europe
they don't, right? So, you don't
actually get those vote counts or you
don't know who if they dissented or
what. It doesn't matter.
>> That's right. People can out themselves
if they want to. But, at the Bank of
England we're fully transparent about
all of that. And so, you can see that
often there are dissents. In fact, after
the last Fed vote I had a number of
friends say, "Gosh, the Fed looks a lot
like the MPC right now." because there
were four dissents. It's quite normal to
have dissents at the Bank of England,
which is pretty different from most
major central banks. But, it's all part
of this idea of sort of personal
accountability for your vote and having
different perspectives on a committee.
>> Um you kind of anticipated my next
question, but how much of your role is
viewed as sort of explaining perhaps US
monetary policy and its potential impact
on the UK versus actually
analyzing the UK and having to know that
particular economy and, you know, when
you first joined the MPC did they hand
you like a UK economic handbook that you
had to like get up to speed on?
>> So, no. There was no handbook, but I did
have to get up to speed pretty quickly.
Um including up to speed with kind of
the data in the UK, which is quite
different from the US. Um but, my my
role really is about looking at the UK
economy, trying to understand what's
going on. Um but, also understanding how
there are spillovers from other places.
So,
by way of example, before the pandemic
when the
uh gilt yield curve moved, about a third
of that move was usually from outside
the UK entirely. So, from mostly from
the US and also the Eurozone. Since the
pandemic, it's been about half of the
the in our yield curve. So,
you know, financial conditions are
affected pretty significantly by what we
have absolutely no control over
whatsoever at the Bank of England, but
it's important to understand how those
spillovers might happen. You also have
spillovers via trade, which obviously
we've looked into a whole bunch through
um through the past year given tariffs
and economic statecraft.
>> It occurs to me what I actually don't
What is the BOE's mandate? Of course, in
the US, it's uh you know, inflate the
the the famous dual mandate. My
understanding is the ECB is a more
ostensibly singularly price mandate.
What is the BOE's mandate?
>> Yeah, so our mandate is to achieve price
stability of 2% inflation sustainably
over the medium term, and then subject
to that um to support the goals of the
government. But it really is Whereas the
Fed does have a two a dual mandate, we
really have one primary mandate um and
and the the rest is secondary to that.
>> How would you characterize the health of
the UK economy at the moment? And Joe
and I get to ask this very basic
question because we don't live here. And
you know, we're we see the headlines
that everyone else does. We see
headlines about energy shocks, um trade
and tariffs as you mentioned. But then
we walk around the city and things
>> Things seem pretty crowded, and people
seem to be eating out and shopping.
>> London where the tourists go, things
look plenty active to me.
>> That's right. How would How would you
describe it at the moment?
>> Yeah, particularly on a Tuesday through
a Thursday, less so on a Monday or
Friday. And then people aren't
necessarily coming into the office. Um
Look, the UK economy has been pretty
weak. Um it's been weak since I started
this role 3 years ago. Um and the
question is why it's so weak. And most
economists, you guys included I imagine,
think of the economy through the demand
side um because that's what we were all
taught for generations to just think
about demand. Um and so demand is pretty
weak in the UK, but actually the supply
side is pretty weak as well. And has as
you mentioned earlier, Joe, has been hit
by a number of successive supply shocks.
And so, you know, we have growth
that's
it's there, there's some, but it's it's
pretty weak.
And even though you have variations, we
have monthly GDP data in the UK, which
we don't have in the US. That was a real
surprise to me. But there are, you know,
variations in the monthly GDP data, but
underlying GDP, which is what we tend to
look at and we build it based on a a
bunch of surveys. Um that's pretty weak,
you know, 0.2% growth per quarter. So,
that's not significant. That said, the
supply side of the economy is also
pretty weak. And so, if you had more
demand than that, that could actually
end up becoming inflationary.
>> Yeah, just intuitively, you know, you
mentioned the supply side and like much
of the sort of developed Western world,
there's the okay, there's the struggles
of the industrial sector in large part
due to competition with China. There's
the fact that if you're in a sector
that's not AI, you're probably not
getting a ton of investment. London
specifically, at least a decent AI hub.
We established demand side is weak, but
you voted to hold rates. So, what is it
about the inflationary environment such
that this weakness does not call for
cuts right now?
>> Yeah, so part of that story is the
supply side, which is also incredibly
weak. So, if you had stronger growth,
that could be inflationary.
But I think it's worth thinking about
where the UK economy was before the war
in Iran, before we had this energy
shock, because I think my and others'
views on where we are right now very
much depends on where we started from.
So, before a few months ago in February,
um
you know, we had inflation that was
still above target. It was it was coming
towards target, but was still above
target. We've had inflation above target
for the best part of 5 years now in the
UK. So, it's been above 2% for all but
one or two months in the past 5 years.
And that's off the back of a a couple of
successive shocks, particularly COVID
and also the Russian invasion of
Ukraine.
And so, as we were looking at inflation
start to come down towards our 2%
target, it had been coming down more
slowly than we had hoped since I got
here in fact. And if you looked at some
of the forward-looking indicators for
wages and also for prices, those
actually seemed to be stalling out. So,
we run a survey called the
Decision-Maker's Panel, the DMP, where
we ask companies about their own price
expectations a year ahead and their own
wage growth expectations a year ahead.
And their own price expectations a year
ahead had pretty much stalled out. So,
they weren't really coming down anymore.
Also, more worrisome in my view was what
they thought about wages a year ahead,
where they thought they were going to
drop a little bit from last year. So,
you know, not much, not as much as we
had expected. Wage growth was Wage
growth was going to drop a little bit,
that's right, not wages, wage growth.
And also, we have agents who are based
around the country who go and talk to
firms, they do a whole survey on pay
settlements.
And pay settlements were due to come in
a bit lower this year. Pay settlement
growth was due to come in a bit lower
than it was last year. So, this
disinflationary process had signs of
stalling out. Also, if you look at
inflation expectations, so household
inflation expectations were really
elevated before Iran was invaded. In
fact, up until, you know, February, they
were above what you could explain
looking at historical relationships
between inflation outturns and inflation
expectations. So, it was a concern that,
you know, households were thinking that
inflation was going to be higher. That
could feed through into wage setting,
which could explain why wage growth was
coming off more slowly than we'd
expected and therefore price growth was
expected. So there were already some
signs of some persistence from previous
shocks left in the economy. In fact,
I've been working on a speech on
second-round effects since before Iran
was invaded and part of me thought,
"Gosh, is this going to be irrelevant
you know, in 6 months when I finally
give this speech?" Of course, it's only
more relevant now, but I was already
worried about some of this inflation
persistence and some of the second-round
effects from the last couple of negative
supply shocks even before Iran was
invaded and of course since then
we've now had a negative supply shock,
an energy shock, and that stands to push
inflation up and growth down, which is a
terrible situation for a central banker
to be in.
>> So just to emphasize this point, is the
idea that if we keep getting transitory
shock after transitory shock or if we
keep getting I think you've used the
word mini waves of inflationary bouts
over and over and over again,
expectations will be more vulnerable
towards higher inflation levels. So
people will be even more worried about
inflation once we get like the third
shock and the fourth shock.
>> That's right, and the size of the shock
matters, too. So inflation was 11% a
couple years ago. That was on the front
page of every newspaper. Households kind
of knew about it. They saw it at the
grocery store. So
we've done a lot of research showing
that households and businesses are
possibly just more attentive to
inflation and particularly once
inflation comes within a certain band.
So there's a threshold. It used to be no
one paid attention to inflation if it
was below 4%. That band has actually
shifted down. So in the UK, we think
that if inflation is somewhere between 3
3 and 1/2%, that's the threshold at
which people actually notice it a lot
more. So if you then have another
negative supply shock and inflation go
up, people will be much more sensitive
to that. We also have done research
showing that people are more sensitive
to upside surprises in inflation than
downside surprises in inflation. Um and
so that's a concern given we're now
facing rising inflation. And then for
firms, um when they're looking at
inflation, it used to be, you know,
before we had these supply shocks that
firms kind of set prices on a schedule.
Um and since the pandemic, they've
shifted much more to state-dependent
pricing. So when inflation gets higher,
they set prices more often and pass
through their higher costs um through
the end user in the form of higher
prices. And that that's remains. So if
that you have more state-dependent um
pricing from firms, then actually you
can get a pass-through from inflation
expectations from them much more
quickly.
>> So with that background in mind, you
know, with people clearly caring about
higher inflation more than they care
about deflation, being more attuned to
higher inflation, and with companies
more willing to reset prices in the face
of higher inflation, to what degree does
the BOE try to get ahead of higher
inflation versus wait for it to actually
emerge?
>> Yeah, so the way that we think about
these kinds of shocks propagating
through the economy, it's sort of in
three different phases. So the first um
the first phase is kind of direct
effects. So when you have an energy
shock, that automatically makes energy
prices higher for everyone. In the UK,
we actually have a price cap for
households, um the Ofgem price cap. And
so households have been shielded from
that bit until July, and then they'll
see energy costs go up. Um so this could
happen in stages. But in any case, um
monetary policy doesn't kick in for 18
to 24 months, so it kicks in with a lag.
So if we were to respond to that right
now, by the time it hits the economy,
it's just too late, and we could risk
suppressing activity unnecessarily. So
mostly you look through direct um energy
effects. Then you think about indirect
energy effects. So firms that are using
energy pass it on. For example, food
production is a great example. It's
pretty energy-intensive both through
fertilizer, but also transport. And so,
you see food prices start to go up,
which I think we probably will
see. Um and so, those are indirect
effects, and um the jury's out a little
bit amongst the central banking
community on whether you should try to
lean against indirect effects or not.
Generally, you should try to lean
against some of them, um but not all of
them, again, because of lags in monetary
policy. The real kicker is second-round
effects, and that's when actually all
these price increases start changing
wage and price-setting behavior. Um so,
that you get individuals and households
saying, "Well, I can't, my money's just
not going as far anymore. You're going
to have to pay me more." And then,
firms, you know, might say, "Fine, we'll
pay you more, but our you know, our
costs are higher, so we're going to pass
that through in higher prices." And that
can turn into a bit of a spiral.
Um we've looked at past supply shocks in
the UK, and every single one of them has
had second-round effects, um but to very
differing degrees, depending on the
state of the economy at the time. So, in
2008, 2011, 2014, 2022, you had
second-round effects in all of these
situations, but the economy was very
different in these different periods. Um
we tend to look at 2022, cuz it's the
most recent one, and I think for a lot
of people, kind of the most scarring
one, um when you had energy costs go up
so much. Um and in 2022, of course, it's
worth remembering we had just reopened
after COVID. So, you did have pretty
strong demand, um and also the labor
market was pretty tight.
>> Mhm.
>> Um that's not the case now, actually. We
have much weaker demand in the UK
economy, and we have a much weaker labor
market, and it's continuing to weaken.
So, we have slack in the labor market.
So, that suggests that we shouldn't get
the same degree of second-round effects
now that we did in 2022.
I think that's of little comfort,
actually. Those were pretty extreme
second-round effects. Um I also look at
2011, when the labor market was actually
much weaker than it is now. You had
unemployment of 8% in the UK, and you
had some second round effects then. So,
right now the economy is somewhere in
between those two. So, we will get some
second round effects.
You know, it's impossible to calibrate
them exactly in advance. The trick for
us also is that you you know, we kind of
know how to measure direct and indirect
effects. We can do that pretty easily.
The second round effects are pretty
difficult to measure.
But of course, if we wait until we have
real concrete evidence of them, we're
too late in responding. So, we're going
to have to make a judgment, a proactive
judgment in advance about the size of
the second round effects that we're
going to want to lean against so that we
can lean against them in time.
>> You know, it occurs to me I have a
theoretical question I've been meaning
to ask someone about this. When the
inflation started to explode, you know,
in the immediate wake of the pandemic
really globally, one of the stories that
people like to tell was that monetary
policy would have weaker teeth or be
less effective in the US in part because
so many American households are on
30-year fixed mortgages, unlike in much
of the other Western world or the
Anglosphere world where a lot of
people's mortgages reset regularly. Did
that actually play out in practice? Did
BOE decisions transmit quicker to the
real economy because fewer households
see their mortgage bill reset on a
regular basis?
>> Yes, so we've done a lot of looking into
the monetary transmission mechanism to
see how the change in the structure of
the UK mortgage market has affected
things because to your point, in the UK
we weren't always all on two and
five-year fixed mortgages. In fact, you
used to have longer term fixes. You have
periods with variable mortgages.
>> it's dominated by two and with the
five-year.
>> two and five-year with I think an
increasing number of variable mortgages.
And so, what you find is that it it does
transmit a bit more quickly. But it's
also very different in the US and the
UK, you can port your mortgage with you.
>> Oh.
>> Whereas in the US, you can't. So,
there's an entire supply problem in the
US that we don't face we face supply
problems in real estate in the UK but
for completely different reasons. So,
that's a difference that's worth taking
into account as well. But it's also
meant even though it's a shorter fix
that we have here, it does mean that,
you know, over the course of this hiking
and cutting cycle, even the rates have
been coming down for a while now,
consumers haven't really been spending.
And I think one of the reasons for that
is that even the rates are coming down,
as people come off a five-year fixed
mortgage, their own debt servicing costs
are jumping massively from where they
were when they first
>> Oh, sure.
>> took out the mortgage. And so, even
though rates are coming down, people's
debt servicing costs continue to go up.
>> And so, as you're in a rate cutting
cycle, you would expect consumers to
spend a bit more. We're not finding that
so much. So, this is one potential
explanation for why consumers aren't
spending more. It could also be scarring
from previous bouts of inflation as
well. But that's going to feed into the
current conjuncture because one of the
concerns, of course, I'm worried about
inflation. I think that's paramount and
I think the risks to inflation are on
the upside. But of course, you have to
offset that with the risk of weaker
demand. And you know, if if if consumers
aren't spending in the UK cuz they're
scarred from previous experiences, then
they're looking at this energy shock and
probably thinking, well, no way I'm
going to spend now. I'd better save for
a rainy day, which by the way could be
now. And so, there is a chance that
consumption and therefore growth could
be even weaker than we've been expecting
as well. So, you have to
offset that with concerns about greater
inflation.
>> Mhm. Since we're talking about the
consumer, I mean, it feels like one of
the few potential deflationary forces
out there but still potentially a very
big one is AI, right? And this idea that
well, if there are fewer jobs because of
AI, then obviously people are going to
be earning less and spending less and
that's going to exert deflationary
pressure on many different economies.
What have you seen so far in terms of
the impact of AI on the job market? And
how are you thinking about this, you
know, kind of very new still
development?
>> Yeah, so the bank has done some research
on how AI's affecting the labor market
in particular and there's some nascent
evidence that maybe those industries
that are more exposed to AI are seeing
fewer job openings
than industries that are less exposed,
which you can imagine. Youth
unemployment is particularly high in the
UK, so I think it's quite easy to jump
to a conclusion that suggests that, you
know, it's very difficult to get a job
if you're just coming out of uni and
maybe that's an AI effect, but I think
there's actually very little evidence to
directly make that link. Um,
and so there isn't much evidence of
that. It's not just the labor market, of
course, though. As I mentioned already,
I'm worried about the supply side of the
UK economy. So most of the supply shocks
we've seen over the past couple years
have been negative supply shocks. AI
represents the one potential positive
supply shock that we might see
coming down the pike and so, you know,
that could be possible. We We look at
the supply side of the economy all the
time now at the Bank of England. When I
first started, we only looked at it once
a year cuz it's not supposed to move
around that much, but we've learned
actually
>> What does that mean once a year? Did you
have like supply side week or something
where you all got together and thought
about it? I find this really
interesting.
>> not that we didn't ever talk about it in
the interim, but we did like a real deep
dive on the supply side of the economy
to try to measure productivity growth,
total factor productivity. I mean,
really deep dive. And it really was a
once a year event. Um, and now we do it
all the time cuz obviously the supply
side moves more than we had expected. We
keep getting hit by supply shocks. Um,
but you know, when we look at the supply
side of the economy, um,
there is no judgment that we've put in
um on the supply side to do with AI. So,
possibly it's in our assumptions about
productivity growth just through some
assumption about investment, but
generally we haven't made a judgment
that over the next 3 years
AI will meaningfully um impact
productivity, and I'm not I'm not sure
that that's right. I think the timing of
this is the hardest part.
>> Well, actually when I think about the
term supply side or supply side shocks
or I think of
there are sort of two things, right?
There's a supply side shock. You can't
do anything. Suddenly the price of
electricity goes up everywhere, and we
call that a supply side shock, and it's
not great when that happens. And then
there is also the sort of like core
productive capacity of a country and how
productive industries are and what kind
type of investment is there and so
forth. Even setting aside the shocks,
the trend seems to be negative in the UK
in terms of business investment. You
hear about the last steel mill or
whatever that's closing. Or I read
something recently um the UK might be
importing salt for the first time or
whatever. In your whether it's formerly
annual but now regular studies of the
supply side of the UK economy, do you
have a diagnosis or do you have an
assessment about what is driving the
sort of long-term deterioration?
>> We do insofar as you can say there
hasn't been a whole lot of investment in
the UK. Um, starting with the global
financial crisis, I think most people
pin that on Brexit, and Brexit didn't
really help, but it it predates Brexit.
Um, and so that has been a long-term
drag on um potential growth,
productivity growth. Um, we assume that
productivity growth in particular will
um rebound to its long-term trend. Um,
and and I'm not sure that that's right.
I think my my own view is that the risk
of that is entirely on the downside, but
you know, a lack of investment is part
of it. Um and then on top of that, I
mean, I I understand how you're
splitting these out, but if you keep
getting negative supply shocks, then
eventually that does feed through into
potential growth.
>> Yeah, and so I think that's a concern in
the way that central bankers have
approached negative supply shocks has
always been you just look through them.
They're temporary. You know, you can't
Bank of England can't do anything about
the Strait of Hormuz, for example. Um
can't actually address it. We have
>> Can't reverse Brexit.
>> No, we have tools that are uniquely
designed for demand-side problems. They
can't really address supply-side
problems. And so we've always learned to
just look through them and consider a
sort of underlying inflation, underlying
growth. Um and I think that when you
keep having negative supply shocks and
you consider that households and
businesses are more attentive to
inflation, um that, you know, they're
setting prices more often, that some
kinds of inflation are more salient for
households and businesses than other,
particularly food and energy inflation,
and we keep having increases in both of
those things, um then that eventually
gets embedded into people's expectations
and and then their wage and price
setting. And so that creates the kind of
inflation persistence that I've been
worried about even before this invasion
of Iran, but now I continue to be
worried about it.
>> I'm going to ask another sort of
background American visiting London, um
haven't been here for many years kind of
question. But when people talk about the
UK's high
>> here last year.
>> Oh, yeah. I haven't lived here for many
years. When people talk about the UK's
high exposure to energy volatility, why
is that? Because the other thing people
talk about in relation to the UK is like
it does actually have North Sea oil. It
does have kind of its own supply. Like
what exactly is that vulnerability in
this economy?
>> So it it has some supply, not massive
amounts, and I think
part of the trick is it's also very
exposed to gas prices, which, you know,
were what went up so dramatically when
Russia invaded Ukraine. And then in the
UK, electricity prices are keyed off of
gas prices, so then electricity is
particularly vulnerable
as well. So, unfortunately, I mean, the
US has kind of energy independence at
the moment. The UK's nowhere close to
that position.
>> I know in the US, there is an entire art
to asking a monetary policy setter a
question about fiscal policy, because
you have to do it very delicately.
Otherwise, they might faint over in
their chair if they're presented with
something outside their remit. I don't
know what exactly the norms are here
about how we're
how we're supposed to phrase such
questions to elicit some sort of answer.
But, with all that out of the way, when
you think about the upward pressure on
inflation, and why you're so concerned
about inflation, how much and we've
talked about energy and all that, how
much does the seeming inability of
government after government to engage in
fiscal consolidation, how much is that a
factor when you think about the
inflation the
the future trajectory of inflation?
>> Yeah, so I mean, I'll say what any rate
setter will will tell you. So, so thank
you for that.
>> Yeah, I've done all the I've done all
the short clearings for you.
>> Yeah, but I mean, the way that we think
about fiscal policy is we take exactly
what's legislated, and we put that into
our models.
>> you stipulate that it doesn't seem like
that there is any real impulse at fiscal
consolidation or capacity right now. So,
what does that mean?
>> Well, so I mean, actually the government
has legislated
some consolidation given fiscal rules,
and so that is exactly what we put into
our forecast. And so, that's just one of
the conditioning assumptions. Is what's
legislated, we assume will happen.
>> Okay.
>> Um and then we base our forecasts off
the back of that.
>> But so, just to push further, some of
these fiscal choices, like the
inviolability of say the triple lock,
which again, I'm not asking you whether
these are good or bad policies, etc. But
are these contributors to the
persistence of upside inflation risks?
>> So, I think um you know, it it
contributes to government borrowing
costs. So, we're sitting in the UK a day
after long-term rates went up. Some of
that is to do with the straight of four
moves. Some of that is to do with true
social posts.
>> Sure.
>> Some of that may be because there are
local elections coming up and I think
there's just a whole bunch of
positioning around that in a gilt
market, which is pretty niche. Um and
and fairly small relative to the US
Treasury market in particular. So, I
think that's all worth considering as
well. And that all feeds through into
financial conditions.
>> You mentioned gilt yields. Now that
you've gone from sort of finance Twitter
to, you know, hardcore economic
practitioner, monetary policy
practitioner.
>> She did have real job.
>> I know. I know, but not like not on a
central bank. Come on.
>> I I'm complimenting the current role,
not denigrating the previous ones.
That's my intent.
>> I'll always be economist Meg to you.
>> That's right. That's right. That's Meg.
>> But like
how do you think about bond bond
vigilantes? Are you know, do you have
nightmares or
do you have you gone from tweeting about
bond vigilantes to thinking about them
relentlessly as you watch UK gilt yields
go up?
>> No. Um so, I I neither have nightmares
about them um
nor, you know, do I wish I could tweet
about them. I think
um
markets are sometimes efficient and
sometimes get things totally wrong. And
so, you know, it's we have an entire
function at the bank that talks to
investors to get a sense of kind of
what's behind their positioning, what
they think. Often, it's what do they
think about us? What do they think we
should be doing? What do they think we
will do? And I think that's all worth
understanding because, like I said,
sometimes they get things right.
Certainly not always.
>> Well, let me ask you a mechanical
question about
the bond market, which is
are the coupon payments as they as we
see yields rise? And this is a question
for all economies. Um but and it's
certainly at least a little bit of an
anxiety in the US as well. As we see
those coupon payments rise, are we
anywhere near where those interest
payments themselves are creating an
inflationary impulse in the UK, which
economists would call fiscal dominance?
>> Yeah, I mean, I mostly look at this
through financial conditions. And so,
you know, if you get bond yields rising,
then that's that's tightening financial
conditions and that feeds through into
the economy. And then there's a judgment
to be made about what monetary policy
should do about it.
>> a fiscal expenditure that that that
coupon payment. And so, the question is,
does that is it of a size such that that
fiscal expenditure, which the screens
tell us is rising when we see the rates
rising, does that is that large enough
or is there a delta there such that that
actually itself creates an inflationary
impulse?
>> So, that No, that's not a significant
impulse that we're looking at. Mostly,
we're just looking at it through
financial conditions.
>> Got it.
>> Yeah.
>> So, we talked earlier about spillover
from US monetary policy. And it is, you
know,
thinkable that the US could be raising
rates sooner than it might be lowering
rates. How would you anticipate the feed
through from a tightening of US monetary
conditions to the UK at this current
moment?
>> Yeah, so as I mentioned, there's
significant read-through from the US
Treasury market into the UK gilt market
rightly or wrongly. Um so if you look at
um economic indicators that come out and
how they influence uh our financial
conditions in the UK. Um
the the indicator if it surprises that
influences conditions here the most is
UK inflation, thank goodness. Secondly
is US inflation. I think third might be
non-farm payrolls in the US. It's not at
all clear why these things should
actually be influencing financial
conditions in the UK, right? But I think
part of that is an implicit assumption
that the Fed is the world's biggest
economy central bank. And so when the
Fed does something, everybody kind of
has to.
Um I don't think that's right actually,
but you can't ignore these spillovers.
So if financial conditions were to
tighten in the US, that would feed
through to the UK and financial
conditions. I mean, of course the reason
matters, but you know, if it's because
of rate hikes
uh in the US, it could mean that our
financial conditions tighten as well.
And then that feeds through into kind of
our view of how restrictive our monetary
policy stance is and how we manage
inflation towards our 2% target.
>> Can I go back to something you said at
the very beginning when I asked you
about what is the the remit or the
objective of the central bank? And you
said one thing is to support the
government. And that is not like
formally I don't think that's part of
the Fed. But I know that that's like why
the whole bank that's why the Bank of
England was founded. It was to be to the
government's bank and to facilitate
financing of the government. Does that
functionally change anything? Like when
you think about that is like part of
Does that Does that mean something
substantively different in terms of the
conduct of monetary policy within the
BOE versus say another central bank when
that's sort of like part of your
founding charter?
>> Yeah, so to be clear, our mandate really
is 2% inflation sustainably in the
medium term subject to that
>> Yeah.
>> to support the goals of the government
and these change
>> Okay. um and and this is a mandate that
the Treasury sets every November. So,
it's once a year they look at it. Um and
you know, what what fits in that has
changed over the past couple of years uh
on the margin.
>> There was an incident a few years ago in
which uh
the bank and the government the bank
helped out the government a little bit.
>> But that that had nothing to do with the
mandate. Yeah, for what it's worth. But
so in my time at the Bank of England,
we've we've only hit our inflation
target for one or two months maybe and
so while I've been at the Bank of
England and and I think generally it's
the case really 2% inflation is the
target and we're working tirelessly to
hit that. So, the secondary part of the
mandate which is subject to that, we
haven't we haven't achieved that yet.
So, that that is the primary focus.
>> Can you talk a bit more about just the
decision-making process at on the MPC
because again, here here I'm going to
emphasize Megan's many other jobs.
You've been in academia, you've been you
know, in business settings and now
you're at a central bank. What are the
sort of differences that you observe
between how like the decision-making
making process works at those types of
institutions versus a central bank? This
is just a long way of me asking you what
the discussions are actually like.
>> Are they as vigorous as Prime Minister's
Questions?
Which is our only exposure to what uh
policy-making looks like in the UK.
>> Yeah, so we meet every six weeks and
every other time we produce a forecast.
So, when we produce a forecast, it's a
more involved process. Um this last
round was particularly interesting
because we didn't produce a forecast. We
said, "You know what? Things are so
uncertain, we're just going to produce
three scenarios. We're not going to give
you weights on them. Who knows what's
happening with energy prices?" But we
produced three different scenarios and
they were based on kind of what energy
futures curves might look like, you
know, how energy prices might evolve and
then also second round effects off the
back of that. Um
And so as you can imagine, you know, in
the good old days, not good old days, in
the old days when we only produced a
central forecast, um that was, you know,
a less involved process I would say than
now producing a bunch of scenarios to
think about risk and uncertainty. And
now I think we're facing kind of
knightian uncertainty, so radical
unpredictability and uncertainty. Um so
it's an incredibly involved process to
produce these scenarios, to think about
different states of the world, to try to
identify where we might be in these
scenarios. And then most importantly to
try to figure out how we would respond
if we were in any parts of these worlds.
Um and so, you know, to figure out our
reaction function we look at you we look
at the market curve, but we also look at
a whole bunch of policy rules. They're
all different. Um and in figuring out
where we forecast from, we have to
figure out where we are. We use a whole
bunch of different models, um get loads
of updates and research notes from our
fantastic staff, um to help inform us of
where we're starting from cuz that's
always really important. Um so, you
know, in a forecast round it's about 3
weeks of intensive discussions and
research
um and notes. And then figuring out how
to communicate that to the outside world
I think is really important, too. So it
is a really involved process. Um
and I would say that uh you know, the
model where we have externals and
internals and where descent is totally
normal does work in that we certainly
don't agree on everything. In fact,
often we don't agree um
on, you know, on important things and
that comes out in our votes, but I think
that's how you make sure that you're
making the strongest decisions.
>> This might be sort of like an abstract
question. You can take it however you
want it. Um
a prior guest we've had on the podcast a
bunch of times, Hyun Song Shin, recently
became the head of the
Korea Central Bank and he I read his
opening speech which I thought was
really interesting. And he said, you
know, central bankers like to talk about
theory and put it into practice. And you
have theories like independence is good
and so forth these ideas you put in
practice. He said, in reality
the practice happens and then you sort
of form a theory around it. And that
we're in a moment of historical change
for central banks for many reasons.
Perhaps political the right populism
politics is changing that might change
the nature of central banks. AI the
extreme uncertainty of AI and how that's
going to affect the economy that adds to
the source of change. And therefore
central banks period are going to be in
a new period of like the old ways. Does
it feel like whether the BOE or general
that we're going to be entering a new
era of central banking per se?
>> Yeah, I think we already have in
fairness. So I've spoken to some of my
predecessors, Kristin Forbes, I saw
recently for example and she said,
you're so lucky my entire time on the
MPC I never voted to change interest
rates at all.
>> god.
>> That's right. And now I've seen a hiking
cycle, holding cycle and a cutting
cycle. And who knows what what comes
next
off the back of this shock. And so I I
do think that that has changed but also,
you know,
I think getting hit by successive shocks
is just here to stay and I think you can
identify some already. So if economic
statecraft is how uh major world powers
are going to operate using economic
tools for foreign policy goals,
those just represent negative supply
shocks for someone.
Um and so, you know, I think we will
continue to have negative supply shocks
whether it's tariffs or export controls
or, you know, investment controls all
these things. Um and then, you know,
climate change uh whether it's, you
know, physical risk or transition risk,
if it crystallizes, that represents a
negative supply shock as well. So, we're
no longer at a point where we can kind
of say, well, one day we might have some
of these things happen. I think we're
already there. And so, this old adage
that you should just look through
negative supply shocks cuz you can't
address them directly. I don't think it
works when you keep having them wave
after wave. Um and I also think uh you
there's just a ton of uncertainty now. A
lot of economists feel like they had a
framework for understanding how the
global economy worked and it it it
doesn't work anymore, but no one's quite
identified the new one. And so,
in an age when you have this much
uncertainty, um you need to stop
thinking about your very specific
forecast where you duke it out whether
inflation's 0.2 percentage points higher
or lower in year three of your forecast,
it's kind of neither here nor there.
It's much more about kind of scenario
analysis and risk management when you're
making decisions about interest rates.
So, figuring out, you know, if if we
thought we were in this state of the
world and it turns out we're in a
different one, how bad would could we
mess that up and how do we minimize some
of those costs? And that's a different
way of thinking, I think, about central
banking than what we had in the past.
>> I mean, other than scenario analysis, is
there anything else that central bankers
should do in order to deal with supply
shocks? Cuz this was a theme post-COVID
in the US, this idea that the Fed only
has an interest rate. An interest rate
is not a particularly adept tool at
dealing with the supply side. As you
said earlier, central bankers are often,
you know, they're very much trained and
focused on dealing with the demand side,
not necessarily the supply side of the
equation. And part of that is because
they don't necessarily have the right
tools.
>> Yeah.
We don't really have the right tools.
So, we've got what we've got.
>> get tools? Is what I'm asking.
>> Yeah, it's a good question. Um I think
probably if if you're making decisions
about the supply side of the economy,
often that comes down to questions about
who choosing winners and losers, and
that's not what central independent
central banks are here for. That's what
elected politicians are there for. So, I
think
some of these solutions have to come
from elected officials and not from
central banks at all. But, understanding
that, you know, it's the multiplicative
effects of multiple supply shocks,
rather than just looking at them in
concert, is important. And also, you
know, we we look at decompositions of
inflation over the past, and um you
can't explain them all using standard
channels. There's just kind of a wedge,
and sometimes that's a judgment that
we've made,
and sometimes it's just an unknown. But,
being a bit more curious about these
wedges, why haven't things panned out in
a way that we can perfectly explain?
Maybe there's something else going on
because of these supply shocks. I think
there's a lot of work to be done in that
area, too.
>> Um just one more thing, but you also
mentioned communicating
um how the central bank how the BOE is
thinking um to the market, and I guess
to households, as well. We might have a
new Fed governor um very, very soon in
the form of Kevin Warsh, and he is, as
far as I can tell, not a fan of forward
guidance. I think that's fair to say.
Um someone pedantic is going to point
out that the Fed may already have
abandoned forward guidance of the bond
market um based off of what happened in
2022. But, if we got a more formalized
abandonment of forward guidance,
does that make your job at the BOE a lot
more difficult if you're trying to judge
the spillover effects from US bonds?
>> I think we don't understand the
spillovers just from what the Fed is
saying about them. We're also looking at
the US economy and the fundamentals. So,
you know, forward guidance has its
place, I think. You don't need it all
the time. I don't think that means we
won't understand what's happening in the
US economy, and therefore how that might
spill over into the UK economy. I think
they're just different approaches on
this stuff. So, if I look over the whole
of this conversation, I you're talking a
lot about, you know, being wary of
inflationary risks, and we talked about
maybe the public and companies being
more primed towards inflationary risks
than they were previously.
Why did Why did you vote to hold rates
last week? Why didn't you
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, thanks. Um you know, I think given
that it will take too long to get
evidence for second-round effects to
actually address them. I think that's a
fair question. You know, if you don't
hike now, then when are you going to? To
my mind, um a big contribution was that
we are going to get some news over the
next 6 weeks or so, but you know, over
the next couple of months. Um and a lot
of that news will not be definitive
evidence of second-round effects, but it
will be, you know, evidence about energy
prices, which are a big feed into
um what's going on with the economy and
with inflation. So, you know, is there a
state of the world in which
um
the um restrictiveness that we already
have in our monetary policy stance um
because we are restrictive, I think,
just not hugely so. But is there a state
of the world in which actually, if the
war ended tomorrow, the Strait of Hormuz
opened up completely, whether that
restrictiveness could squeeze out the
second-round effects that have already
been kicked off by this crisis? I think
it's I think it's defensible to think
that possibly there are. In my view, the
risk is entirely on the upside though.
There's kind of a ratchet here. I I
think you know, the risks to energy
prices and also second-round effects are
probably on the upside rather than the
downside. But I do think that it's worth
waiting for a little while um to see
kind of what happens with the
progression of this war and therefore
see what we can infer about how it will
propagate through the economy um before,
you know, we make a move. Megan, it was
so great to catch up with you. Um
congrats on the new role. I know we're a
little bit late to it, but it was really
great to be able to actually ask you all
the questions about what you're doing
right now.
>> Yeah, thanks for having me. It's great
to see you.
>> Yeah, thank you so much. That was great.
>> Joe
>> That was really fun.
>> It was great.
>> I have to say I'm I'm a little bit
jealous that Megan probably has, you
know, like a really nice office at the
Bank of England building. I know.
>> of England, Bank of England. Bank of
England. I know that would be a pretty
sweet job.
>> I think I'm going to go through like my
entire career without ever having my own
office in a building.
>> I know, me too. This
I like I love my job. I and I'll
I'm going to leave it at that. It would
be nice to one day just like have an
office with a door and all that stuff,
but
>> Um but there are a bunch of interesting
things to pick out of that conversation.
I mean, I thought her point about, you
know, the emphasis of central banks and
economics in general on the demand side
historically versus the supply side kind
of kind of captures a lot of the
struggle that policy makers have had
with the post-COVID economy, right? Like
all of economics is very much focused on
the idea of like, well, you need a
healthy consumer who's spending, right?
>> Yeah.
>> And going out and buying stuff versus
like thinking about those supply side
shocks.
>> I think this um she made a really good
point, which is it does seem at least
theoretically possible to truly have
one supply shock after another and they
really are just independent supply
shocks, right? That at least it's
conceivably possible. A pandemic is not
the same thing as a war here, as a war
there, as a war. They could be discrete
events. The the sort of money line for
me when she said what
the rise of economic statecraft. And if
once governments start using economic
tools as foreign policy and and once
that cycle gets going, then there begin
to be reasons to think that these
discrete one-off supply shocks are not
just going to be things that are one and
done, but that are part of a sustained
new part of the world that consistent.
And you see this obviously I mean the
terrorists are one part of it, but all
of the movers that we talked to about
reshoring and strategic domestic
investments for backup capacity etc.
This is like what constitutes a
sustained trend. And so I I thought it
was really just overall very interesting
to hear someone like really wrestle with
the reality of conducting monetary
policy in a period of sustained supply
side degradation shocks what have you.
>> And then the question of course is, you
know, if the if the central bank is not
the right entity to deal with these
supply side shocks. Like should it given
its existing tools which we touched on.
Like should it have new tools? I mean, a
lot of people would say no because, you
know, that's veering into fiscal and you
want governments to decide that and
democratically
um elected governments to decide that.
But on the other hand, like if it keeps
happening it also feels somehow
unsatisfactory to just say like, well,
we're going to have to deal with this
with like the existing toolkit.
>> Yeah, and also again, but it really does
cut straight to the core of like what we
want in a democratic society. You could
say, you know what? Part of the reason
we have
declining productivity is because
regulations on setting up a new factory
are burdensome. Do we want non-elected
officials deciding, oh, you know what?
We're going to change environmental
regulations. We're going to change the
minimum wage. We're going to change the
protected habitats speak, you know, like
most people would be very uncomfortable
with the idea we're going to change
household zoning so that there could be
more construction in London. Most people
would get really uncomfortable about
what it would mean for the central bank
to have the capacity to address supply
side problems.
>> think the other point is like maybe
there are more creative ways of doing it
that we haven't even thought of yet. So
for instance, like
could you do monetary policy on a weekly
basis versus like a monthly decision?
No, seriously, if like if the entire
world is changing on a week-to-week
basis, maybe you need to start like
making these decisions and like Yeah, I
don't know. My point is like there may
be creative solutions out there that we
haven't even thought about.
>> Well, let's
Let's get on that. Let's get our work on
that.
>> All right. Um shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dash
Bennett at Dashbot, Keil Brooks at Keil
Brooks, and Kevin Lozano at Kevin Lloyd
Lozano.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at bloomberg.com/odd
lots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
24/7 in our Discord,
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like the video or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.